//Boys

Stage One (approximately between the ages of 9 and 12)
 — the “maturifying” of boys, as it does in girls,
begins surreptitiously when the hypothalamus in the brain sends a “signal” to the Pituitary
(also in the brain) that it should begin orchestrating 
the complex hormonal process that will change this boy into a man.
The hormones begin flowing but no outward physical changes are usually noted; 
although, if one wanted to obtain blood samples, the surge in hormones could be measured. 
Growth rate is usually no greater than it has been through childhood. 
Erections, which in the first couple of months of life were frequent due to maternal hormones, 
are still infrequent.

Stage Two (approximately between 9 and 14)
 — Stage two is probably what most boys, parents and physicians are watching for and gets the most
attention. Of hair, voice, skin and genital changes, the growth of the gonads is the easiest 
and most consistent sign that puberty has started and the growth spurt is beginning. 
Once you can say stage two has begun (testicle length 2.5 cm) muscle tissue and fat begin to 
increase. The face starts to change in appearance, 
blemishes begin to occur and attitudes start to “morph.”
Actual growth in height starts quite slowly in stage two but increases velocity toward the end. 
A small amount of thin, light pubic hair begins at the base of the penis. Testicles and scrotum 
grow but the penis probably does not. Erections are becoming more frequent. The aureole, 
the dark skin around the nipple, darkens and increases in size – yes, even in boys.

Stage Three (approximately between 11 and 16)
 — This is the stage when the penis begins to grow, in length rather than width. 
 Pubic hair is darkening, becoming a little more coarse and spreading toward the 
 groin from the pubis. Testosterone has reached the level where erections are 
 frequent and noticeable and can be ill-timed, occurring seemingly without provocation.
Appetite has increased even more as height growth velocity is reaching its peak – 
even slightly obese children often look like they are thinning out; and faces are changing, 
dramatically in some children. Shoulders broaden, facial hair grows on upper lip and voice 
“cracks” as the voice-box begins to protrude in the neck and voice deepens. 
Breasts have darkened and may show some protrusion due to normal hormonal growth 
(gynecomastia) – yes in boys too.

Stage Four (approximately from 11 to 17)
 — The growth spurt in height is already well underway and now the genitals darken, 
 become rugated and the penis grows in width as well as length.
Underarm and facial hair increase, become thicker and hair may 
begin to grow around the anus and on the chest, arms and legs. 
The skin gets oilier and the voice continues to deepen.

Stage Five (approximately between 14 and 18)
 — Stage five is when the adolescent takes on the physically adult appearance. 
 Adults are considered stage five the rest of their lives. 
 Height velocity has slowed considerably now and will eventually cease altogether 
 when the bone growth-plates fuse (rarely as late as 21). 
 Based on ethnicity the hair will reach its greatest extent and shaving is a necessity; 
 and the voice has changed to the tone and timbre it’s destined to be.
Genitals are adult male and erections are at adult levels and more controlled. 
Sweat glands have developed and acne has usually subsided. 
Any breast tissue development (male gynecomastia) has resolved 
or is much less prominent under the enlarged pectoral musculature. 
Much of the emotional rollercoaster-drama has subsided or will in the next couple of years 
[although parents may not become ‘smarter’ until the early ’20’s. 
The boy has become a physical ‘man’; however, just like stage five girls, 
he is not emotionally/psychologically mature.

//Girls

Stage One (approximately between the ages of 8 and 11) — This stage begins fairly surreptitiously when the hypothalamus notifies the pituitary to begin orchestrating the puberty process. It can be identified, should one choose to do so, by the increase of various hormones circulating through the blood which weren’t there all through earlier childhood.
A girls ovaries will enlarge internally and female hormone production will begin, but external development is not yet visible.

Stage Two (approximately between 8 and 14) — Breast development is usually the first sign of a girl’s puberty to be noticed. Small buds of breast tissue can be felt just below the skin of the nipple which may be slightly tender as they start to elevate and the Aureole (area around the nipple) begins to increase in size.
Stage two begins the height and weight growth in girls as their bodies begin heading toward a more adult curvaceous form. Initial growth of pubic hair may be seen which is usually fine and straight before it becomes more coarse and curly.

Stage Three (approximately between 9 and 15) — Growth in height and weight continues in this stage along with breast tissue. Pubic hair becomes coarser and darker.
Even though not visible, hormonal effect on internal organs are well underway and there may be a whitish discharge from the vagina. Sometimes uterine development has progressed far enough along to generate a girl’s first menstrual period but it’s usually light and is probably not regular.

Stage Four (approximately from 10 to 16) — If it hasn’t already started, stage four will bring on Menarche (first menstrual period) along with ovulation; but, still it may not necessarily be on a regular basis. Ovulation usually is what makes a girl’s “periods” regular but not necessarily in the early stages. (It is also possible to have regular periods even if ovulation does not occur every month.)
Other development progresses as well: Aureoles darken and separate into a secondary mound above the rest of the breast and pubic hair extends to a more adult triangular pattern.

Stage Five (approximately between 12 and 19) All adults are walking around classified as a “Tanner stage five.” Stage five is the final stage of outward physical development and is largely where a girl child has been heading ever since her pituitary got the go-ahead to make a woman. Full height is reached, young women are ovulating regularly, pubic hair is filled in and the breasts are developed fully for the body.
Voice changes have occurred, sweat glands have developed, acne has usually subsided, skin and hair changes have completed over breasts and genitalia and much of the emotional rollercoaster-drama has subsided. She has reached physical maturity; HOWEVER, just like stage five boys, she is not yet emotionally/psychologically mature.